Blog Post for Autobuild docs for Pull Requests (#72)
readthedocs/blog: pr-builder.rst

.. post:: July 14, 2019
   :tags: gsoc, pr-builder, continuous-documentation, feature
   :author: Saadmk11
   :location: DHA

> Autobuild docs for Pull Requests

Reviewer: We typically use titlecase for blogs and I'd spell out documentation or use something like "Building the Docs".

"Autobuild docs for Pull Requests" -> "Building the Docs in Pull Requests" or "Autobuild Documentation in Pull Requests".

Author: Autobuild Documentation in Pull Requests sounds nice. Thanks :)

================================

Building Documentation for pull/merge request has always been one of the most requested feature of Read the Docs.
This feature will allow users to build documentation for pull/merge request automatically using ``webhooks``
and get status notification to the Providers Status API (e.g. Github Status API).
This will help users to check if the documentation build passed
and also how the documentation looks before merging it to master.

As a student of Google Summer of Code (GSoC) 2019, I (`Maksudul Haque`_) was tasked with building this feature.
The Main goal of my project was to make it possible to build documentation when ever a pull/merge request was created,
and send build status notification to the Providers Status API.

Google Summer of Code
=====================

Google Summer of Code is a global program where students work with an open source organization

> on a 3 month programming project. **Autobuild docs for Pull Requests** was one of the project ideas on

Reviewer: If you do change the title of the blog, I'd change this line as well.

Read the Docs `Project Ideas`_ for Google Summer of Code 2019. I applied for the project and got accepted.

I have started working on this project from May 2019.
All of my work on this project can be seen in the `Pull Request Builder Board`_.

Background
==========

Many of our users wanted a way to visualize the documentation update that was made in a pull/merge request.

> They also wanted to know the status of a build ``(passed/failed)`` before merging the pull/merge request to master.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They also want to know whether the documentation build will pass before merging the pull/merge request to master.
```

This would allow users to have more confidence on the pull request
and make the pull/merge request less likely to break the documentation after merging.

> So, In reply to this Read the Docs `core team`_ selected **Autobuild docs for Pull Requests**

Reviewer: This sentence is a bit awkward.

as one of the projects of Google Summer of Code 2019.

Pull Request Builder Features
=============================

Currently I have implemented these features and working on more upcoming features.
Some of the major features are as following:

> - **Creating External Versions:** We create an ``External Version`` when we receive ``pull_request`` ``opened/reopened``

Reviewer: These should probably not be monospaced. They aren't code.

![Screen Shot 2019-07-15 at 11 17 42 AM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/185043/61238754-2edc5980-a6f2-11e9-9369-b4777607f1b5.png)

Author: okay

  and also see the documentation generated by that build.

**Currently, we only support GitHub and planning to extend to GitLab and BitBucket**

Contributors Wanted
===================

As Read the Docs is an open source project backed by a small team of developers,
most of them are busy to keep things up and running only. Therefore, its quite
hard for them to take time to implement new features. We would like to get more contributors
to improve this feature. If you know a bit of Django and Python and interested to improve this feature
you are always welcome to contribute. If you need any support to start contributing, you can get in touch with
me or any other member of  Read the Docs team. You can find all of us at `#readthedocs` freenode
IRC channel or `readthedocs gitter`_ channel. I am `saadmk11` at IRC and `@saadmk11` at gitter.

Conclusion
==========

To conclude, I would like to say this was a much needed feature for Read the Docs and also its users.
This feature will improve our platform and make it a true Continuous Documentation platform.
I think that many users will benefit from this feature.

> We will extend on this feature and integrate it to other platforms like ``GitLab/BitBucket`` in the near future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will extend on this feature and integrate it to other platforms like GitLab and BitBucket in the near future.
```

> We would like to add more features on this. So, It would be Great to have Feedback form the users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are additional features you'd like to see for building documentation in pull requests, please `let us know <mailto:team@readthedocs.org>`_.
```

Google Summer of Code is a global program where students work with an open source organization
on a 3 month programming project. **Autobuild Documentation in Pull Requests** was one of the project ideas on
Read the Docs `Project Ideas`_ for Google Summer of Code 2019. I applied for the project and got accepted.

I have started working on this project from May 2019.
All of my work on this project can be seen in the `Pull Request Builder Board`_.

Background
==========

Many of our users wanted a way to visualize the documentation update that was made in a pull/merge request.
They also want to know whether the documentation build will pass before merging the pull/merge request to master.
This would allow users to have more confidence on the pull request
and make the pull/merge request less likely to break the documentation after merging.
So, to achieve this Read the Docs `core team`_ selected **Autobuild docs for Pull Requests**
as one of the projects of Google Summer of Code 2019.

Pull Request Builder Features
=============================

Currently I have implemented these features and working on more upcoming features.
Some of the major features are as following:

> - **Creating External Versions:** We create an External Version when we receive pull_request opened/reopened

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Creating External Versions:** We create an external version when we receive a pull request
```

>   webhook event for a project from gitHub and trigger a build for that version.

Reviewer: Maybe give a small bit of detail here like:

    External versions are short-lived versions for a Read the Docs project that are separate from the project's main documentation.

>   webhook event for a project from gitHub and trigger a build for that version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  webhook event for a project from GitHub and trigger a build for that version.
```

- **Synchronizing External Versions:** Whenever there is a new commit on the pull/merge request,

>   we synchronize the external version for that pull/merge request and trigger a new build with the latest changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  we synchronize the external version for that pull request and trigger a new documentation build with the latest changes.
```

- **Deleting External Versions:** Whenever the pull/merge request is closed or merged,
  we delete the external Version associated with that pull/merge request.

- **Warning Banner for pull/merge request documentation:** While building documentation for pull/merge requests
  we add a warning banner at the top of those documentations to let the users know that
  this documentation was generated for pull/merge requests and is not the main documentation for the project.

> - **Sending Status Notification to Status API:** We send Build status reports to Status API of the provider (e.g. GitHub) of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We send build status reports to status API of the provider (e.g. GitHub) for
```

Reviewer: Maybe even remove "for the project" from the end of the sentence.

  the project. When a build is triggered for a pull/merge request we send `state: pending` notification with build URL
  and after the build has finished we send `state: success` notification if the build succeeded without any error

>   or `state: failure` notification if the build failed with build URL.

Reviewer: This sentence may be a bit too much detail for a blog post.

  By going to the build URL provided in the status report users can view the build steps
  and also see the documentation generated by that build.

**Currently, we only support GitHub and planning to extend to GitLab and BitBucket**

Getting Started
===============

> **Autobuild Documentation in Pull Requests** is currently on Beta testing and only supports Github repositories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Build documentation in pull requests is currently on Beta testing and only supports Github repositories.
```

The formal name of the project is probably not *that* relevant to readers of the blog.

> If you want to dive in and enable this feature for your project you can `email us <mailto:support@readthedocs.org>`_.

Reviewer: :+1:
